**Natalie** [00:00:02] Welcome to another episode of Talk WIT Us. I&#39;m not only the road, the media executive for wit for 2022, and I&#39;m joined by the co-presidents of WIT Nishmi and Jane. Could you please introduce yourself to everyone listening? Starting off with Nishmi

**Nishmi** [00:00:17] Hi, everyone. My name&#39;s Nishmi. I&#39;m the co-president for which this year. I&#39;m in my fourth year of uni and I&#39;m studying commerce in advanced science, majoring in chemistry and financial economics. So the general reason why I joined with it was actually because I had quite a lot of friends here, initially when I joined subcom, and then I really enjoyed being part of the team and really loved our overall purpose and mission. So I decided to stick with up to president and, you know, me and Jane have both sort of been in the subcom together and then became execs together. And then now we&#39;re here as co-presidenst. So it&#39;s been a fun, fun time for the past two years and keen for a third year.

**Jane** [00:01:04] Hey everyone, I&#39;m Jane. I&#39;m the other half of the co-presidents group and similar to Nishmi, I&#39;m in my fourth year studying commerce and information systems, so I guess I&#39;ll dive a little bit into why I joined WIT as well. So also again, I knew some people into the society. Before I joined and we actually both volunteered at O-week together in 2020. So that was a really good way to get a little bit of a taste of what the society was like. Also, see if we fit in with the vision and the culture, and luckily it worked out. So yeah, we stayed on for two years, both as events subcom and then events executives and now as so, yeah, coming back for our third year.

**Natalie** [00:01:46] That&#39;s great to hear. And since we are all from WIT and you&#39;ve spoken about why you joined, what are you hoping to get out of it for the third year?

**Jane** [00:01:56] Yeah, I mean, Nishmi and I we spent a tiny bit of our first year of wit organizing some events for in-person. Going into our second year last year, we wanted to have quite a few in-person events and you know, things haven&#39;t exactly turned out as planned. So moving into our third year, we&#39;re definitely hoping to engage with students a little bit more actually on campus, as well as with some of our sponsors. Maybe being able to do events on sponsored site would be really exciting, but also like in general, our society, you know, we were created not too long ago, so hopefully continuing to grow and expanding our demographic and membership base and potentially trying some new things with some new portfolios.

**Nishmi** [00:02:40] Yeah, no, definitely. I think overall, I pretty much agree with what Jane has said. We&#39;ve had many, many talks about what we really want to do as co-presidents and hopefully steering, which in a direction not only in what we think is best, but also really trying to reflect what all of our executives and directors really want to do with our own portfolio. So, you know, this year we introduced the media portfolio publications, socials, careers and comps portfolios to just breaking down from last year education and events portfolio. This year, you know, not only hoping to get more in-person events and bonding with our sponsors a lot more, but really pushing for our overall vision and making it a lot more clear that it&#39;s not only for women to push for these values, but also for all other genders, including male and non-binary. Or however else anyone really identifies us because, you know, it&#39;s an overall effort as opposed to just for women to fight for. So that&#39;s something that Jane and I both really want to keep making, I guess not publicized, but more so just making sure that people are aware of that fact.

**Natalie** [00:03:54] And I&#39;m really excited as well a part of it to see what we do this year and continue to grow our community well. On a more general note with it being the beginning of the year and you starting again. How are you feeling with being in-person for classes?

**Jane** [00:04:12] It&#39;s definitely going to be new. Even though I&#39;m going into my fourth year, I spent the past two years completely online. It just come with its benefits. Attending tutorials from bed has definitely been one of those, but it&#39;s definitely good to be back on campus. Being able to actually see the people who are doing your group assignments with. That&#39;s always a plus when it comes to the group dynamic. But yeah, together with in-person classes, hopefully we&#39;ll have some in-person events and it&#39;s just a great way to be able to spend my last year. Maybe like connecting with some people on campus, you know, going to the stock market salad bar. There&#39;s other things I&#39;m definitely looking forward to this year.

**Natalie** [00:04:55] what is the stock market?

**Jane** [00:04:57] It&#39;s a really cool salad bar that&#39;s in the upper campus food court where you can kind of personalize your own salad, like pick your own toppings. And it&#39;s so, so good and they have some classics such as their Thai chicken salad there is to die for.

**Natalie** [00:05:11] I must check it out!

**Natalie** [00:05:14] Following that, how do you think uni is different from high school? I know it&#39;s been a while, but is there anything in particular that stands out from uni comparing to high school?

**Nishmi** [00:05:26] I think that high school, you had a lot more guidance as to what your courses wanted you to do or what your subjects, I should say, wanted you to do all your teachers were expecting of you. In uni. It&#39;s also, you know, you dive in the deep end and slowly figure it out yourself. I mean, you know, your course coordinators and your lecturers are there for you. But there&#39;s also 150 other students taking the same course at the same time as you. So getting a, you know, personal sort of feeling that you would have gotten a high school just doesn&#39;t really exist in university. There&#39;s still that option, you know, like you could still develop a better relationship with your course coordinator or your lecturer, but uni is really the time to just like starting from first. You just diving into the deep end and just floundering about trying to figure out what actually goes on and how to get through it. But overall, you know, it&#39;s an awesome time to be at uni. Not right now because of COVID, but you know, the next three to five or six years or however long you&#39;re at uni really just changes your perspective of the entire world around you. So definitely like there&#39;s there&#39;s a huge difference to

**Natalie** [00:06:42] That is very true. I find uni its much larger compared to a high school where it&#39;s more tight knit, you know, everyone, whereas it&#39;s a new person every day going to uni. What is something you new from uni that is an academic?

**Jane** [00:06:58] I feel like almost everything I&#39;ve learned from uni isn&#39;t academic. You know, like going into this kind of ties into Nishmi&#39;s answer. But I know, like when you&#39;re in year 12 and you&#39;re doing the HSC, you think that you have like the best time management in the world and then you&#39;re going to uni and you realize, you know, there&#39;s always there&#39;s always areas to improve, and time management is definitely something that you really need to. I wouldn&#39;t say master, but you need to, like, put effort towards it to try to improve that area just because, you know, in high school, all of the time you&#39;re just studying, you know, you might do some extracurricular. But that always is kind of it&#39;s a very low commitment in comparison to what you might do at university, whereas at uni, you&#39;ll be you&#39;ll be attending your classes and you might think, Oh, OK, I only need to go to uni like three days a week. This is amazing. But at the same time, like you&#39;ll also be doing extracurriculars joining societies which are a lot bigger commitments than you might think. And then at the same time, like you want to work, you want to make sure that you&#39;re getting that experience. And then also spending a lot of time doing applications, whether that&#39;s internships or graduate programs. So I know that&#39;s something I definitely struggled with a lot in the beginning of university, especially given that in my first year, I didn&#39;t really do much extracurriculars, so I didn&#39;t really have the need or that extra push to get me to really put a lot of effort into doing time management. But now, definitely, as I go into my fourth year, I&#39;m going to be applying for graduate applications and then also at the same time being co-president, for WIT, time management is something that&#39;s definitely very, very important. You know, still a work in progress, but I would say it&#39;s definitely improved since I first joined uni.

**Natalie** [00:08:34] And you talk a lot about time management. Is there something that helped you a lot with time management or it&#39;s something that progresses over time?

**Jane** [00:08:44] I would say both. I would say the biggest reason why my time management improved would be if I didn&#39;t work on it, I would be getting horrible grades and I would be unemployed. I guess that&#39;s the harsh reality of the situation, but a lot of the time like you need to have that intrinsic motivation to improve on the set and soft skills, like in high school. You have a lot of people who are kind of pushing you towards a goal, whereas in uni you have a lot of like ownership of your own situation and a lot of the responsibility is completely on you. So it&#39;s more just finding that inner motivation to really work on those things and understanding that you only have a limited number of years in uni. Definitely. It&#39;s a time to explore and to learn more about self, but also at the same time, there&#39;s an aspect of it where you need to understand that this is the time to be really getting as much experience as you can before you actually enter the workforce. So, yeah, definitely make the most of it, and that should be something that really motivates you to you really manage your time and make the most of the very short time you have at uni

**Natalie** [00:09:52] and saying that what do you think is your fondest memory at uni?

**Jane** [00:09:57] OK, I&#39;ll have to think back to first year because I think attending class on my bed definitely wouldn&#39;t be one of my fondest memories, but I would say, just like buying lunch with your friends and sitting on the library lawn and then like panicking before mid-sentence in the moment, it doesn&#39;t feel great. But looking back on it that seeing you like bond with people, just like those simple moments where you are hanging out together, you&#39;re working towards a common goal. And I guess, like uni is one of the last times where everyone is in like the exact same arena of life as you like, as you progress into the work force you&#39;re constantly like. Of course, you have people within your cohort, but you are always like mingling with people who might be much older, like you&#39;re all working on different things, whereas in uni, that&#39;s so definitely that community there. So I would definitely say just the small things enjoy them as much as we can.

**Nishmi** [00:10:53] So just emulating off of what Jane said earlier about really putting yourself out there and getting as much experience as possible in your time at uni is something that really stood out to me in back in first year. I don&#39;t really put a big emphasis on, you know, doing joining societies. I thought, you know, grades with the most important thing of being part of uni, which is, you know, it was carrying my mindset from high school. And since then, grades have kind of been the least of my worries and my priorities. I think it&#39;s definitely still important to maintain a certain grade or a certain WAM. But I put a lot more emphasis in the later years of my university journey to really get as much experience as possible. So trying things out with society is trying things out with different companies. If you go to internships or even as simple as doing some volunteer work because any experience or putting yourself out there in any type of role that you may be interested in will, you know, is something that you can always learn from and reflect from. So that definitely has been one of the main things I&#39;ve been going by. My main mindset that I&#39;ve been adopting as I go through and reach the end of my degree, and I think that one of my fondest memories of uni definitely was back in First-Year. You know, the vibes of pre-COVID times really was something amazing and just making new friends by meeting someone who was sitting next to you in a lecture. I think that today is just a lot harder to make that connection, especially if you&#39;re on Zoom for for a lecture or a different platform. So just the simplicity of making new friends by sitting next to someone and then grabbing lunch is something that I think is very, very undervalued.

**Natalie** [00:12:52] Yeah, for sure. It&#39;s really interesting how you brought up all this extra curricular activity and applying yourself for internships and opportunities compared to high school where we are focused on getting into our university course and now we&#39;re thinking beyond just our marks. Yeah, and it will be interesting how we go back in person from two years online. And for me personally, I know this applies to a lot of others too. There&#39;s pressure to apply for internships as soon as possible. Do you think this is true or we should be spending our time focusing on other aspects?

**Nishmi** [00:13:36] You should do what you want internships or working at a certain company through an internship program is something that you really want to do or get experience and definitely highly recommend that you know, if you&#39;re not interested in getting an internship and want to get experience via other different avenues, that&#39;s also totally fine. As long as you&#39;re passionate about what you want to do and you have a reason for doing it, that&#39;s all you really need when you&#39;re actually trying to put yourself out there to get experience. So, you know, Jane and I have both in our four years or in our force coming into our fourth year have had our fair share of various experiences. Not only do society work or internships or roles, but you know, outside of university, you know, it might be just sports or might be through learning new skills like cooking or knitting or painting or really anything else or volunteer work as well. You know, so really anything that you&#39;re passionate about, you should definitely continue doing it, learning more about it. And you know, all skills that you learn from any experience can be totally transferable to anything that you want to do. So there&#39;s no pressure, but it&#39;s a good way to get some experience. If you&#39;re unsure about what industry you want to go in and you don&#39;t take the time to just learn and absorb what you do in an internship, if you&#39;re going down that path or any other role.

**Natalie** [00:15:01] Onto that with experiences and what is important, do you find that in your final year at uni, this becomes more important to go for internships and more opportunities? Or there&#39;s still other aspects that are more important to focus on.

**Jane** [00:15:22] Yeah, I think definitely your final year is kind of your time to really start hustling, applying for grad roles. I do want to add on with regards to my previous answer that you&#39;re going for internships in your penultimate year. It&#39;s definitely something that you&#39;re if you&#39;re interested in pursuing a career, but in certain areas, it&#39;s definitely a good or highly suggested route to take. Just because when you&#39;re going in applying for those jobs, when you graduate, you want to be as competitive as possible. And we all know within the COVID environment and so many students at uni, there&#39;s always a lot of competition going on. That being said, your final year should be a time for you to enjoy your kind of lost your freedom. You know, like as much as it might be stressful to be trying to pass your courses and then also applying to like 10 different jobs at the same time. You also want to make sure that you know you&#39;re enjoying your time at uni, you&#39;re making connections, you&#39;re maintaining your friendships. So it&#39;s all about finding a balance, I suppose, which is a lot easier said than done. But that&#39;s kind of one of the blessings that you have when you join like a society and you&#39;re in a group with a lot of people in the same situation as you and you can apply to jobs together, you can, you know, practice your interviews, you can help each other out. But at the same time, you&#39;re making sure that you&#39;re maintaining those friendships and you&#39;re always meeting new people and always testing ourselves in different ways.

**Natalie** [00:16:53] And since this is your last year, do you have any plans for after this year?

**Jane** [00:16:58] Well, after this year. So after graduation, I suppose that&#39;ll be fully employed. But I think you know your first year of working, you&#39;re really trying to find your feet and just, you know, find your place within your role within your company, like in the world in general. So I guess it can be very difficult to set goals for your first year of working because you&#39;re really just getting used to things. But I think they&#39;re very similar to my previous sentiments is I just want to make sure that I&#39;m making as many connections as I can and not necessarily career connections, but just making sure that I&#39;m meeting a wide range of people. I&#39;m speaking to people in different roles, in different areas of life because you&#39;re like, We&#39;re just setting up our careers. We don&#39;t know what&#39;s going to happen in the future, and you always want to keep your options open. So definitely just making sure that as a person, you&#39;ll be as open as possible and making sure that you&#39;re spending as much time as you can. And develop yourself, and when you&#39;re developing, that often comes with learning from other people as well.

**Natalie** [00:18:05] And what about you Nishmi?

**Nishmi** [00:18:07] I am actually in my penultimate year now at this point and be focusing on hopefully landing an internship at the end of the year. And I really wanted to experience a little bit more of the finance banking industry. So that&#39;s just something that I&#39;m keen to explore at the moment. So that&#39;s probably a focus for the end of the year. But even after graduation, I think I. My my answer, it would be very, very similar to what Jane just said. So, you know, it&#39;s a brand new world, it&#39;s a brand new sort of environment that we&#39;re putting ourselves in and finding your feet and finding your confidence, particularly when you know, many, many people feel a lot of imposter syndrome at this time is something that&#39;s very, very important. So. Trying to just develop that confidence and develop the mindset that you know you graduated with your degree, you&#39;re in this role and, you know, at this company and you know, you didn&#39;t get here because your bad and you know that they took you on as a petty employee, they took you on because you&#39;re a great employee, you&#39;ve got, you know, you finished your degree, you&#39;ve got great results, you&#39;re moving in the right direction if that&#39;s something for you. And just being able to develop that mindset is a really valuable skill that I think a lot of people overlook. So I think at this point, I don&#39;t have any specific plans about what I want to achieve in this year and next year or even after graduation. It&#39;s more so just the skills that I really want to develop during my time if I get the chance. So moving on my own pace to develop new skills is something that I&#39;ve learned actually quite recently is is something that I&#39;m trying to apply to the final years.

**Natalie** [00:20:06] Yeah, that sounds really good, continuing to improve and, as you said, develop those skills and branching on to that. What advice would you give to a first year?

**Nishmi** [00:20:19] I think that a piece of advice that I would give to a first year is literally just try and put yourself out there. I know it&#39;s very, very difficult in your first year because you&#39;re settling in and you&#39;re trying to, you know, match your pace with the pace of university and get an understanding of what it&#39;s like. But the only way to do that is to really just put yourself out there and try new things, whether that be joining a society. If that&#39;s not for you, then you know, there are plenty of other ways to get involved and get going and, you know, living your best life at uni. So just being able to do that and having the confidence or not even confidence with just being brave enough to take that first step is something I think I would really, really recommend to a first year.

**Jane** [00:21:06] I&#39;d say very similar to what Nishmi said, put yourself out there and try as many things as you can. A first year is the time to you making mistakes and to be having all of your embarrassing moments that you&#39;ll probably think about 10 years into the future. But it&#39;s when, you know, like it&#39;s before the career crisis really sets in that a lot of things we experience in the second and third year of uni. So in your face, you try to meet as many people as possible, try as many different things as possible, whether that&#39;s, you know, like maybe you mentioned volunteering or societies or even in your courses trying like different things to different majors. It&#39;s OK if you want to switch majors or even if you want to switch degrees, everyone goes through it. But yeah, like Festina is really all time to let loose, you know, forget about all your HSC stress and don&#39;t start worrying about the stress yet either. But really just enjoy, like, make friends and make the most of the time that you have on campus as well.

**Nishmi** [00:22:05] Yeah, I think though, like something I would add really quickly to that is that, you know, if you are experiencing career stress in your very first year at university and you know, you started applying to internships or someone applying to different various roles that tie into your degree, and you know, if you do get rejected, then it&#39;s a really important aspect of the entire journey. So, you know, everyone gets rejected from time to time. If you&#39;re applying to an internship, so don&#39;t take it personally, most companies just take penultimate years. But definitely going through the application process is a huge learning opportunity because, you know, you slowly get prepared for what professionalism actually means, how to use it, how to apply it to your application process, and you just understand and learn more about yourself as well. So that would be, you know, that might be for you. One of the opportunities that you might take on in your first year, just randomly applying to companies. And if you&#39;re rejected, no biggie. You just kind of keep moving forward and keep learning and keep adapting to what you really want to showcase about yourself and showing that to the company that you&#39;re interested in.

**Natalie** [00:23:19] I definitely agree. Even when some companies are saying they only take pen ultimate, yes, it&#39;s still important and you gain a lot from just talking to those companies and seeing what they&#39;re about. So learning where you want to go in the industry rather than just going straight for the internship, for experience. And is there anything you would do differently when it comes to uni?

**Nishmi** [00:23:51] I think for me, it would have been. I wish I had a little bit more fun during uni. I know that it sounds strange just because like, you know, I have had fun from a professional sense, you know, and I&#39;ve joined WIT, I&#39;ve been able to experience so many things during my university life, but I wish that I had more time just to kind of relax and unwind and, you know, take the time to just do things on my own pace. Instead of doing things a thousand kilometers an hour or, you know, something something like that, so it&#39;s definitely something that I would have done differently, just taking time for myself and know being able to put myself first when I need to.

**Jane** [00:24:34] Yeah, I think I would echo very similar sentiments to me. Well, probably very similar types of people at home. You know, I was one of those people who was having the career crisis in my first year, and I was thinking like way to ahead. I put so much pressure on myself, you know, a time where it really wasn&#39;t necessary. So I think definitely like when it comes to uni, it&#39;s important to just roll with the punches and just accept that, you know, life is unpredictable. And in high school, you felt like you were in a very controlled environment where if you studied, all the good things have come to you, whereas in uni, there&#39;s a whole different number of factors that come in and apply. So I would definitely say like in or and just uni in general, I definitely would have liked to been a bit more relaxed, apply to apply myself into a lot more different areas instead of just thinking strictly all I need to improve or strive towards getting like building a career from the ground up. But instead I just developing myself and thinking about what I was interested in or what parts of myself I thought I could improve on, because uni is really about time for character development. And then once you&#39;re in the latter state of uni or the early stages of a career, you can start thinking about career development then. So maybe that&#39;s an area that I would have liked to spend a little more time on.

**Nishmi** [00:25:57] Yeah, no, definitely. I think the first year, like my first year, was the only time that I had fun because I didn&#39;t have a career crisis.

**Jane** [00:26:04] Yeah, the annual career crisis?

**Nishmi** [00:26:07] Yeah, yeah. I mean, I I started having, you know, I started thinking more about my career when I was like, you know, starting my third year. So I was halfway through my degree before I had a had a realization. And right now I&#39;m sort of in a career crisis. So, you know, it&#39;s it&#39;s a bit more. I think it&#39;s just more prevalent just because like, I&#39;m near the end of my degree and people are asking me, Oh, what industries are you interested in? Oh, what do you want to go? Or, you know, like what experiences have you had that led you here? And you know, that&#39;s something that&#39;s going to take you forward? And are you going to carry that forward with the big questions to think about? And you will have many, many big decisions to make when you&#39;re in your final or penultimate years. So really, just take the time to enjoy life as you go through uni because. It doesn&#39;t come back. So make sure you guys are having fun.

**Jane** [00:27:11] Well, I don&#39;t put too much pressure on yourself to have fun. I know I think I would feel guilty about not having fun. So, yeah.

**Nishmi** [00:27:21] yeah, but I feel guilty about having fun.

**Jane** [00:27:24] Yeah, exactly. So the key is to just don&#39;t put pressure on anything.

**Natalie** [00:27:29] I think having a balance which I&#39;m still trying to figure out as well is important when it comes to any because you can spend a lot of time on uni work because it&#39;s up to you of how, how well you want to go in the course, but also your wellbeing and going out seeing friends is really important to you and having fun in general. Yeah. So with that being said, did I miss anything that you would like to talk about?

**Jane** [00:27:59] I think you pretty much come at it just ended on this last note. Yeah, feel free to check out with sessions. We have a shameless plug, but feel free to check us out. We&#39;re practically on every social media platform that exists, but we have a whole bunch of really exciting things planned for this year, whether it&#39;s just related to meeting people, making friends. I feel, you know, maybe in the latter stages of your degree and looking to start applying to internships. We have a lot of exciting stuff coming up and a lot of good resources available to everyone as well.

**Nishmi** [00:28:32] Yeah, definitely. And if you need to or if you want to just reach out to anyone on the exec or director team or even Jane and I was more than happy to talk to you, get to know you and, you know, hopefully develop a nice little friendship. Just take the time to enjoy your uni experience. And don&#39;t worry if things don&#39;t go your way, you know?

**Natalie** [00:28:57] Yeah, for sure. I really enjoyed it talking to you, Jane and Nishmi, and thank you for sharing your stories and experiences and those listening to the podcast. We hope you&#39;ve enjoyed this episode of Talk WIT Us, and we hope to see them the next one.
