Vivian [00:00:01] And today, we we are really excited to have Gabby and Jane to share this experience of being part of the empowerment program last year, and we'll just start off by letting Gabby and Jane to introduce himself. Your name degree, a fun fact. And also why did you apply for the empowerment mentoring program?

Gabby [00:00:19] Thank you, Vivian. Hi, everybody. My name is Gabrielle, Gabrielle and I am one of the co-presidents of the NSW Women in technology. I'm also a third year bioinformatics engineering and advance science student, and I would say a fun fact about me is that I am black belt in taekwondo. When it came to applying for the empowerment mentoring program it was something that I applied for in first year of uni, and it was a way for me to kind of clarify where I wanted to take my career. I felt really lost with how I wanted my degree to translate into a role within technology, particularly within industry or within research. And this program is so well designed to be able to answer those questions that you have, particularly when you're so fresh and young as a firt year. But I also know from other people's experiences it's equally as great for when you're in your penultimate or final year because it allows you to build those really solid connections which are necessary for that point of your degree.

Jane [00:01:18] So, hey, I'm Jane, I'm one of the events co-executives at WIT, and I'm in my third year studying commerce and information systems with a major in finance. So fun facts about me. I'm a avid collector of vintage books. I have way too many at home, but I just can't resist the pretty covers. But why I joined the empowerment program was I applied in my second year of university when I was still part of the WIT subcommittee. I had kind of finished one year of university, but I felt close, like I just had theoretical knowledge and nothing to really drive me towards a particular industry or to a particular role. And I haven't really had that experience talking to industry professionals. Without much knowledge into, you know, like what the different roles and technology would even entail. And I think it's really easy to go to events and hear talks, but you don't really get to get that personal relationship or hear real life experiences. So that's something that I really wanted to gain and something that I ultimately did gain through joining the empowerment program.

Vivian [00:02:27] Definitely. Thank you so much for sharing your experience, a part of the Empowerment Mentoring program. So I guess I'll start from the very beginning in terms of the recruitment process. Do you want to share about how? How do you find the recruitment process for the empowerment mentoring? What looks like the return applications and interview?

Gabby [00:02:45] Yes, sure thing. So with the empowerment mentoring program, we really design it to have an easy application process where you can put yourself out there and ensure that your goals and your vision for what you want to achieve in our program are very clearly laid out. So this is in the form of a written application. And so far, this will be due on Sunday, the 6th of June 11:59 p.m.. But essentially, you just have to answer a few written questions really just outlining your goals and what you want to achieve within the program and why you're joining it. This is then followed. All successful applicants of the application will then have a short interview with one of our representatives from WIT, just so we can gauge once again a bit more about your motives and time commitments and ensuring that you're really excited to be able to participate in the program because it's highly anticipated. But we, unfortunately, we do have a selected number of representatives and mentors available to students. And then from there, successful applicants will then move through to a training induction. We will give you all the skills necessary to know how to interact with your mentor, to do your own elevator pitch, to reach out to them. Schedule meetings so we ensure that you guys are very well prepared by the time that you do get your industry mentor, which is in our opening ceremony, which is an amazing networking night that we have planned. At every step of the journey, WIT is with you there to ensure that you are getting the most out of this program, even from the very early stages of the application process.

Jane [00:04:23] So like you mentioned, the process is really clear and streamlined. You just answer some the questions first about why you want to join and then you have a short interview. Just talking about what you really want to gain from the program. So any advice to anyone who does want to join? I think the best thing is to, like be honest, talk about what you genuinely want to gain from the program or the kind of things that you want to do with your mentor and what you really want to learn from that whole experience because it is quite a long program to go through. I think as someone who did go through that whole application process, it is a really easy process. The WIT representatives, they do their best to make you feel comfortable, and it's not an intimidating process at all. And like I mentioned before, it is really streamlined, so nothing's too complicated.

Vivian [00:05:14] Thanks, Jane, so much for the advice that you have for our audience. Gabby, do you have any advice for students who would like to apply for the mentoring program? How do they make their application stand out?

Gabby [00:05:26] Yeah, I do. I think making sure that your goals are very clear and the purpose of why you are applying, whether it's in your written application or in the interview is one of the most important things. When we are looking and screening applications, looking for people who are not only motivated and excited and invigorated to embark on the program, but they also have somewhat of a clear idea of what they want to get out of it, what they want their mentor mentee relationship to look like. If they want to be paired with somebody who's a bit more senior so they can learn from their experience and their career or academic journey. Or maybe if they want to be paired with somebody who's a bit more junior within the company and they want to learn how they embarked on different opportunities throughout university and then translated that into a career. In addition to just really being quite clear with your goals, I would also recommend people to just really communicate their own enthusiasm as well for the program as well as their time commitments because it is something that lasts for quite a few months. And if it's quite evident that you can put in the time to ensure that you attend the mandatory workshops and you can fulfill those hours in order to get you AHEGGS accreditation, which is another great aspect of the program, then that's another thing that's going to boost your application.

Vivian [00:06:45] The want to really understand your experience when your mentor when you were part of the mentoring program,

Jane [00:06:51] I was paired with a mentor from Deloitte and going into the program, I hadn't really had much experience talking to industry representatives before. And I think one of the really big things that the mentoring program did for me was really helped me to be able to get into that groove into how, you know, you should speak with industry professionals in a way that is both professional but also. They are still a person in this, still someone that you can really have a conversation with. And in my situation, I was paired with a really fantastic mentor. She worked in consulting, which is really perfect for me because that was something that I was considering, but I didn't have a lot of information on. And so by being able to speak to her and hear from her personal journeys as opposed to, you know, just attending an event, I was able to hear about her personal experiences. Highs and lows and what you can realistically expect from that role. And that was really fantastic because I think as like a second year student, you hear these buzzwords thrown around and you don't really understand what they truly mean or if you get into that role, what you're actually going to do. Being able to talk to my mentor, you know, and hear about her career journey, not just like her current role. That's something that's really valuable and something you can't really get from just a networking session and meeting someone from the first time. And it's something that still off today. The mentoring program, it ended last year, but I still keep in contact with my mentor, and so that's something that I'm super grateful for.

Vivian [00:08:21] That definitely is really great to hear you're still keeping in contact with your mentor. How would you recommend our audience to prep for their mentoring session to make sure they make the most out of the program?

Gabby [00:08:32] I think that the best way to ensure that you are getting the most out of the program is to plan your sessions. And I think it's really important to remember, is that something that you will learn throughout the mentoring program is that your mentors are human too. I think that's always this thing is you need students that we kind of put them on a pedestal or we just think, Oh yeah, this person's from like, you know, these buzz companies big four. And we kind of forget that they've kind of been through our experiences as well, but also they've got their own time to manage, too. So in order to ensure that you are getting the most out of your mentoring sessions, I would recommend and what WIT does provide us is a goal structure. First and foremost, write down everything that you want to get out of the program, what you want to learn. Do you want to get your resume reviewed? You want to improve on your interview skills? You want to learn a bit more about the day in the life of what your mentor does and write them all down and split them off with the different times that you want to allocate. Then you can give this to your mentors. They have very clear expectations of what you want to talk about and ensuring that they are actually achieving your goals with you as well. But it's also important to not have it to be too structured because then it does lose that personal connection of a personal element, which is really important to have that bond with your mentor as well. And if you do hold your meetings over lunch or over tea or the afternoon tea, it's something really great and it's good to be able to have those natural discussions whilst also getting your resume checked or doing a practice or mock interview if you are lucky enough to have your mentor in person. You might be able to visit their facilities or have an in-person catch up session. And I think that is a tiny bit rare these days post still being in the COVID19 world. But if you are able to do that and something that quite a few mentees and mentor pairings did in 2019, when I participated in the program, I had the opportunity to do in that way. You're not only seeing your mentor and seeing them in their work environment, but they also introduce you to other people within their team and other people in the office. And you get to know not only your mentor, but all of their connections as well.

Vivian [00:10:39] Definitely. And I really like the range of activity that you have to suggest, like a mock interview, a resume review and challenges. And I I really like the point of meeting your mentors in person and also like potentially expanding your network to the colleagues of your mentor 100 percent. Did the mentor that get allocated to you align with what you are going for initially?

Gabby [00:11:02] Yes, sir. When I joined the program, I was paired with a mentor from Westpac and it was actually quite interesting because it was the second that I walked into the opening ceremony where we were about to undergo our network and time that one of the Westpac employees came up to me and was like, Oh, I thought you were doing bioinformatics. And they started telling me about how they were studying biomimetics originally in their degree, but then they decided to change it halfway through. And at that point, in my own university journey, just being towards the end of my first year, I was so unsure as to whether I wanted to keep the specific major that I had chosen if I wanted to change it to something else. So I immediately I had a point of connection at this point of similarity with this person from Westpac. So when we continued to network and I learned a bit more about her, I was really lucky to learn that we actually went through a lot of the same experiences. And that's why I did choose to my preference to be with her, and I was very lucky to be able to get her as my mentor. And I think it's funny because I would never imagined myself to have like a mentor from a bank. I never really considered myself to be to work within the banking industry. But the you know, the beautiful thing about the mentoring program is that you learn from their experiences and now working potentially at Westpac or something within that industry is something that a lot more open to and have a lot more of an understanding of. And I guess in terms of like the different topics that you can discuss in your sessions, feel free to personalize it to the things that you are specifically going through. So for me, one of the things at the time was that I wasn't really sure how I should be utilizing my LinkedIn page or if I should be active on it. How could I use my LinkedIn profile? And she really kind of coached me through that. And then at the same time, I also had a few interviews coming up for various positions, and she was really a wonderful help in ensuring that I was most prepared and that I was very much aware of what to expect from industry and the finance world at the time. So it's one of those things where even though you may come into the program having certain expectations about your mentor who you're going to be paired with, the because there is such a diverse range of mentors available from different companies, different backgrounds who have gone through a million different experiences. You will always be surprised with two of you who you will be paired with and the wealth of knowledge that you really learn from them.

Vivian [00:13:29] Yeah, definitely. I think it's really interesting that you come from a stem background when you get when someone who is in the banking industry. Jane, how did your mentors influence the career pathway that you wanted to pursue?

Jane [00:13:43] So like I mentioned before, like going into the mentoring program, I had absolutely zero idea where I wanted to go with my degree I had. I'm currently studying a degree in information systems and commerce, so I suppose I'm in a situation where it can really swing both ways. And I actually at the time, I wanted to go into finance and I wasn't even sure if I wanted to go into technology at all. But after talking to my mentor, I think you really get to learn what you might actually do in a role. You know, like before, as a student, I was kind of just reading people's reviews on Glassdoor, on Reddit, and I didn't really know like, what are the actual tasks that you do and what skills do you get out of this job? And my mentor was in consulting and I'm going to be doing an internship in consulting later this year. And so I suppose I could say she had a very big influence on why actually, I wanted to go into that role. But I think being able to hear from someone who's actually in that role and especially in consulting, it's an area where you can get such a wide breadth of knowledge. That's what really attracted me to that role. And prior to joining the mentoring program, that wasn't something that I was really aware of. And so I think when you actually talk to someone, you get to hear, you know, like what they've learned through every single step of their career path. And as someone who's just starting their own career path, that's something that's really valuable to you and something that you don't really get to learn very easily.

Vivian [00:15:07] Is there a particular year that we have to apply for to empowerment mentoring program?

Gabby [00:15:12] No. There is it, which is, I think, one of another really great aspect of the empowerment mentoring program. So whether in your first year, your second year, your fourth or fifth, graduate, either way, there is everything and anything that you can get out of this program, regardless of your progression throughout your degree. I think in terms of how far you are throughout uni and the experiences that you've developed, whether you have an understanding of industry and you're really on top of it or you don't. There is so much that you can learn from, and the program is designed to ensure that it enables everybody to be able to kind of flourish throughout it. And I think you don't even really have to be from a STEM background as well, whether you're studying just pure commerce or finance, or even if you're from a completely different industry in general from where your degree is. Because our mentors are from such a wide range of companies and all of them themselves have a variety of different roles and responsibilities. If you just want to undergo the process of self-development and professional development, then the empowerment mentoring program is 100 percent for you.

Vivian [00:16:25] What advice would you have for first year students who are not sure about what career they want to take? And in this case, should they still apply for the empowerment mentoring program? And if, yes, what kind of research that you would recommend they do?

Jane [00:16:39] Yeah, I would definitely recommend first year students to apply for the empowerment mentoring program. I know it's something that we definitely like. Let all our first using our subcommittee know that this is a really, really fantastic opportunity. I think as a first year, that's when you kind of learn your basest level of theoretical knowledge in the most minimal amount of industry experience. And so this is a really great way to dive straight into starting your own career journey, like envisioning where you want to take your career into the future.

Vivian [00:17:10] And I guess moving onto the next question is I was start Gabby, because you were part of the empowerment mentoring program back in 2018 or 2019 when there was no COVID. Whereas for Jane, you were part of the empowerment mentoring program in twenty twenty when there was copied. Obviously you have to meet online and there were definitely a lot of challenges arises. So would you guys want to share the challenges that you faced when you were part of the mentoring programs and how do you overcome it?

Gabby [00:17:39] My first challenge and my challenges will be quite different from dates, I'm sure. For us, it was just a matter of finding. At times it was difficult to coordinate a time where my mentor could take a break from the office and we'll meet up. But once we kind of got our schedules or assigned one session, we found that on a fortnightly basis it was a really good time for both of us. So we just set a Google Calendar invites and scheduled that for fortnightly because when I did it, the program went for over the course of a term rather than over a few months. And that worked out to be really well. And another way that we kind of motivated ourselves for our sessions was we always chose a different cafe and ordered avocado toast from it. So my mentor loves avo, and I'm a bit of a fan myself. So it was really fun, just kind of trying out these different breakfast places around Wynyard and Barangaroo at the city and whilst also developing my own career and professional and personal development.

Jane [00:18:40] Yeah, I think definitely doing a mentoring program really brings on a whole new world of challenges when it's online. And I think one of the biggest challenges that I know quite a lot of my other friends in the mentoring program had experience was because you don't get to meet in person. It can be a bit more difficult to build that initial report, especially because I was located in Sydney and my mentor was located in Melbourne, so there was about zero chance that we could meet in person. And so I knew from initial meetings it was a bit unfortunate that we weren't able to meet in person, but something I know like this year, we do have a couple of students who might be applying from other, you know, like not in Sydney or mentors who might not be in Sydney either. And something that I found really helps for me was to like, do different activities with your mentor over Zoom. As much as you know, a lot of these online games or challenges can be overdone. It's a really good way to establish that relationship before you actually start diving into all your questions and also making sure that you know, every time you're meeting up with your mentor, you catch up with them and see what's going on in their lives before you actually start getting into whatever agenda that you've already prepared. And that really just helps you to create that personal bond with your mentor as people. In addition to that, mentee mentor relationship, and I know quite a few people had some difficulty finding the time to meet with their mentors as well. That wasn't something that I really had difficulty with because from our first meeting, we had kind of set our expectations there and we had discussed how often we wanted to meet and, you know, like whether it was on like a three week basis or a six week basis. And I know this can be kind of difficult just because, you know, the mentors that working that busy and like the mentees, we have class or university students. So sometimes it can be difficult to find that time. But I found that, you know, in the first meeting, arranging those expectations and discussing, you know what the basis of that relationship should be. That's something that's been really useful in maintaining constant communication. Like Gaby mentioned, Google Calendar invites are really amazing.

Vivian [00:21:06] Definitely. Would you say that this program is open to people who are not in Australia as well?

Jane [00:21:12] Yeah, like I would definitely say, like for any international students, the program is still open for them. I know for a lot of the workshops that we're having, those are going to be hosted online as well. So that isn't really much like resistance then having international students take part in the mentoring program. And definitely there's still like just as much value that you can get out of this program.

Vivian [00:21:35] Definitely. And I guess my last question would be, what is the highlight of being part of the empowerment mentoring program except being able to definitely being able to pay with industry one on one? What are the most enjoyable aspect of the program based on your personal experience? So Gabby and Jane?

Gabby [00:21:56] The highlight for me was the actual workshops that we did throughout the program, so in order to fulfill the 20 hours to get the AHEGGS creditation, which holds workshops that are mandatory for empowerment mentees to attend. And I actually originally going into these workshops, I was like, I don't know if they're going to be a bit generic. I wasn't really sure how amazing they would be. And mind you, I was on the event's team organizing them. But when you're sitting there and you're participating and you're hearing from, for example, we had a representative telling us how to use your LinkedIn effectively and create posts and boost exposure to ensure that your posts are going onto the timeline of a range of different companies and ensure that you're using that tool to the best way possible. And then we also had like a public speaking workshop where we stood up in front of, you know, a crowd and just went for it lunch, a few chips, tips and tricks. And it's amazing kind of how integral and useful the skills that we learned through those workshops are. And even to this day, two years later, I like, you know, I think back on them and I've been able to continuously develop them throughout my university journey. And I really do feel, though at the beginning of that program, when we were participating in those workshops, that was the beginning of the growth for those more kind of personal skills. Because yes, it's important to have the ability to undergo professional development and grow that aspect of your life. But in order to be proficient in such a way, you need to personally be able to have your own clarification and vision of where you're going. So it was the self branding workshop and as well as the other skills that really enabled me to kind of have a stop think about where I wanted to direct myself. And it was that that was a really big highlight. And in that process, I also learned a bunch from the other mentees. So being able to network with my fellow mentees and the great thing is that some of them were in first, like many others were in third year about to graduate. So I was able to learn a lot from them and hear about their experiences, learn how they're discussing with their mentors and what they're talking about. And I really think that student aspect is so important, and it was a very big highlight for me.

Jane [00:24:30] I think I just reiterate one of the points that Gabby brought up because my highlight was quite similar. But yeah, one of my biggest highlights was definitely being able to meet the other mentees, even though for me, it was virtual, it was still really great to be, you know, like I the networking with them during the opening or closing ceremony, or just like the community that was created from, you know, like our fun messenger chats, trading topics on like what to speak to our mentors about and just hearing about their different relationships with their mentee mentors. And it was really great to be able to speak to a group of people that are in the same boat as you, even though we all came from so many different backgrounds.

Vivian [00:25:10] Yeah, it's definitely I think this is also my highlights of being part of the WIT empowerment mentoring program for two years on a role because I was there in 2020, 2019. I guess my last question is kind of touch based on what Gabby mentioned about accreditation. Would you like to expand more about what AHEGS accreditation is and what are some of the requirements involved?

Gabby [00:25:34] Yeah, sure thing. So essentially AHEGS and for those who don't know, it stands for Australian Higher Education Graduate Statement. And as I'm sure you can work out from that word, is that when you graduate, you have an academic transcript, which is a summary of your subjects but you also have a list of extracurricular opportunities and initiatives that you embarked on throughout uni. So this means that when you do graduate, you're actually going to have units will be women in technology empowerment mentoring program on your transcript. And this is something that is extremely valuable as not only for yourself at your graduation and for future employers, but it shows the different experiences that you developed throughout university outside of just your education. And it's something that you can use in the application process for different graduate opportunities and in order to have an accredited program and in order to have these different things on your statement, it means that you're dedicating a certain number of hours to it. So it's also a proof of your commitment to different programs. And there are a range of different opportunities available from UNSW that enable you to accumulate a few different things on your graduate statement. But the empowerment mentoring program is one of them, and it really is valuable to display and demonstrate to future employees and to yourself that you have embarked on different projects outside of just your coursework.

Vivian [00:27:02] One more question before we wrap things up would be what is in store for this year with empowerment mentoring programs that you would like to mention to students who are keen and who are still on the fence of applying for the program?

Gabby [00:27:15] I think one of the things that I'm really excited from an organisor's perspective is that we're going to be holding a training session, which is like an incubator session for all empowerment mentees, where we essentially sit down with you in a small group and step through the specific skills that you need to first put yourself out there and undergo that networking session, but also how to reach out to your mentor, how to go about the different processes we sit down, we go through different scenarios that you might encounter throughout the mentoring program and brainstorm different ways that you can overcome these challenges and obstacles to ensure that you really are getting the best experience possible from the program. And it's also a great way to meet us, as well as the fellow mentees you'll be doing the training session with, and it's something that's going to be really exciting because something that we haven't really done in the past with previous iterations of the empowerment mentoring program that we're really excited to offer to our students as we haven't had the opportunity to give it to mentees in the past. And so it's through using the feedback of different both of the mentors and the mentees from previous iterations of this program that we're able to offer you the best possible experience available.

Vivian [00:28:30] Sounds perfect. And yeah, just to add on to Gabby's point, apart from the induction induction that we are holding for mentees, which will be really interactive as well as we are also our events team is also currently in the process of finalize the all mentees guide to kind of guide you through the process of having a mentor and also potential topics and potentially discussion topics that you can discuss with new mentors. Before we wrap things up, I just want to learn more about how the mentee mentor pairing process work forward and how mentee are meant to be selecting your mentor.

Jane [00:29:03] Yeah, sure. So in terms of how mentors and mentors choose each other, so before their mentees enter the opening ceremony, they'll be able to kind of pick what industries they're interested in. And based on that, we'll be allocating who they get to meet during the opening ceremony of the empowerment program. And so the mentees will be rotating through different breakout rooms and they'll be able to meet a really big range of the different mentors that we have to offer. And based on how much you click with a particular person during the opening ceremony or how much you're like, super interested in what that career path looks like. The mentees will be able to nominate the top three people that they'd like to have as their mentors, and based on that, that preference the team will be able to allocate and to the best of their ability, try to give them the mentors that they're most interested in.

Vivian [00:29:56] Thank you so much for Gaby and Jane for taking the time out of your day to share that experience. And like Gaby mentioned, our empowerment mentoring program will be closing on this Sunday 11:59. So if you're keen on getting more industry insightful mentors from industries from companies like Google, Alaskan and more, definitely apply. Thank you so much.
