Zoe Webster  0:09  
Welcome, everyone to the next installment of Women in Technology's TalkWITUs podcast series. My name is Zoe, and I'm a member of the 2021 WIT Education subcommittee. I was extremely excited and honoured to speak with our most recent guest, Dr. Suzie Imber. Suzie is an associate professor of Space Physics at the University of Leicester. Her main research focus looks at the interactions of solar wind, with the planetary magnetospheres of Earth and Mercury. She is currently involved in the BepiColombo mission to Mercury, which launched in 2018, and will go into orbit around the planet in December 2025. In 2017, she was thrust into the public eye for being crowned the winner of the BBC series Astronauts: Do You Have What It Takes? Suzie is also an experienced mountaineer, undertaking numerous expeditions to climb uncharted mountains in the Andes. Welcome, a very big welcome to the podcast, Suzie.

Suzie Imber  1:04  
Thank you so much Zoe, nice to meet you.

Zoe Webster  1:06  
Lovely to have you. Where are you joining us from today?

Suzie Imber  1:10  
Well, I live in the UK, as you can probably tell from my accent. I live in the Peak District. So I live basically in the middle of nowhere in a national park in the middle of the UK. Although I work as you mentioned at the University of Leicester, which again, is in the Midlands in the UK.

Zoe Webster  1:24  
That sounds lovely. As many of our listeners are university students, I wanted to start by asking you about the beginning of your own university journey. Why did you decide to study astrophysics?

Suzie Imber  1:36  
So I decided to do a straight physics degree.. at the time, there weren't so many options. So these days, you can choose to specialise pretty early, you can do a degree in physics with astrophysics, or physics with space science.. back then, it was more common just to choose a straight physics degree. So I did four year master's in physics. And I really didn't know what I wanted to do with it, I didn't have a plan, really. I was interested actually in cosmology and astrophysics more broadly, only because I'd read popular science books in that area. And that was the most accessible area for a young person to be reading about at the time, I think these days, there are lots and lots of books that you can read on all manner of topics, from quantum physics, to particle physics, to cosmology, to laser physics, and they're all out there and available. But back when I started my degree, which actually was in 2001, there wasn't that availability of books that were accessible to young people who weren't already physicists. And so that's what I'd read. So I was interested in those things. But I hadn't really had an opportunity to study a lot of the different aspects of physics. So I didn't know what I was really interested in, in terms of the physics. And so I did a straight physics degree at Imperial College in London. And yeah, I didn't really have a plan with what to do next, I'd really just had a plan to try and do as well as I could in my degree, and then kind of see what happened.

Zoe Webster  2:54  
That's really interesting, with regards to your degree progression. I'm in a stage now where I'm about to do my Honours. And people are asking, are you thinking about further study? So was it always your goal to complete a PhD then? Or did you kind of fall into it?

Suzie Imber  3:10  
No, absolutely fell into it. It wasn't my plan to do a PhD at all. I found as I went through the degree that I was studying that the parts that I enjoyed the most were the research parts. So towards the end of our degree, we were able to sort of be embedded in a research group and take on a research project; and that's fairly common in undergraduate degrees. As you get towards the end, you do a dissertation on a topic. And my master's dissertation was about trends in the sun earth system. So looking at the sun, looking at the activity of the sun, and many of us study this 11 year cycle of solar activity, which is a very clear cycle that we're able to observe, but there are actually much, much longer cycles in solar activity, lasting 1000s of years, or 10s, or hundreds of 1000s of years. And I wanted to look at trends in global temperatures on the earth over those timescales and see if I can link the two together. So looking at things like ancient tree rings, ice cores, any way that we can obtain information about the historical temperature of the Earth, and trying to compare that and trying to see whether there was some influence of solar activity on these trends and cycles. So I got really interested in that subject more broadly, it was a very open ended project, which is ideal because it meant that I could take it in the direction that I was most interested in. And started to think about maybe the fact that actually research was something I really enjoyed. And I was lucky enough to be in a position to apply for PhDs. I had also over the preceding summers been looking for internships, and I had been to NASA and worked at NASA for two summers as a summer intern. And they put me in something called the laboratory for extra terrestrial physics, which is a great title, but really it was just the planetary science division or Earth and Planetary Science Division. And so, I had already had a taste of research in that environment as well and in a specific area, which was space plasma physics, and so I decided to do a PhD in space plasma physics; or at least to apply for a PhD and see who would take me. But it certainly was never a plan that I had, it was just an opportunity that arose that I then took.

Zoe Webster  5:09  
Awesome. Yeah, that's really interesting. So it sounds like that's how you got your passion and interest in research. What is it that you find most rewarding about your current role as a professor and a teacher?

Suzie Imber  5:22  
I just I have a lot of hats to wear, and I really like that. So, your job as an undergraduate student, you know, you have a lot of courses of study. But really, you're doing the same thing, you're studying for these courses, you're trying to gain an understanding of these different areas of your discipline, in order to pass the exams, and you have this sort of goal in mind, and you're working towards it. And then as a young researcher, again, your work is revolving around probably one or two projects, and your job is to be a researcher, and you're honing those skills. As you start to gain more experience, you start to be given and be able to apply for different things to do. And so in my case, I have a research group looking at the magnetospheres, the magnetic environments of the earth and the planet Mercury. That means I supervise PhD students and postdocs. I teach in the university, I teach three undergraduate courses, as well as running masters projects. Now in turn for the students that are coming through to do their masters. I'm the Pro Chancellor for students at my university, which means I was elected to this role, which represents the students across the university. It means, actually, that I get to give the students their degrees. So I shake their hands, as they come across the stage in this sort of fancy ceremony and award their degrees, which is tiring, but so lovely, you know, I shake the hands of my own students who I've spent four years teaching as they finally graduate. And honestly, I think we're both almost in tears at this point, because it's so lovely. And I also run a massive outreach program, and work with as an advisor for the Swedish Space Agency and NASA. And so actually, you can see that sort of lots of different aspects to my job. And I like them all, I think it's a bit overwhelming, because they could all expand to fill my time any one of those jobs I could do on a full time basis. And so that's the challenge, is juggling all of these things at once. But at the same time, I like change, I like the fact that every day is different. I love interacting with students, I love interacting with other researchers, you know, so the variety is really rewarding. And I think that's sort of the reason why I enjoy my job so much. Also, I have a lot of freedom. As long as I get my job done, then I can do it any way I want to. And I can pursue research directions that I'm interested in. And I can teach my students in a way that I think is appropriate, I can choose the subjects in some cases that I teach them and design the lecture courses around our mutual interests. So having a lot of freedom in your day to day job is also a real plus, I think.

Zoe Webster  7:36  
Yeah awesome, you can get to do so many exciting things; I have no idea how you time manage. I would love to see your organisational calendar and all those things.

Suzie Imber  7:46  
I'm not sure you would actually, I think you would run screaming if you saw my organisational calendar. Yeah, I mean, you exactly put your finger on it the challenge. And I know that this is certainly not just me, everyone in the working world will probably tell you a similar story of demands that can't be met, you know, to do lists that expands at a greater rate than you can reduce it and, you know, working evenings and working at weekends. And so, there's definitely a trade off, the more you take on, the harder it is to fit everything in. And the other thing that I know, that I struggle with, and a lot of people that I know struggle with as well is that, we always try and do everything to 100%. You know, we have a sort of perfectionist tendency of not being able to submit something that isn't exactly how we wanted it. And so, one thing that I've been working really hard on over the last year or two, particularly during COVID, when I've had a chance to kind of sit back and really reflect on what I'm doing with my tim, is trying to work on that and trying to realise that actually, sometimes, a piece of work is almost perfect. And it's okay, I can still submit that, I don't have to spend another four hours on it to get that final 1% up to the level where I'm perfectly happy. Because if you do that you drive yourself absolutely crazy, and I've done it for many years. So I'm sort of working on that at the moment.

Zoe Webster  8:54  
I'm so glad you brought that up, because I think perfectionism is something that I also see a lot of the people that I know at university struggle with, it certainly requires a lot of hard work. And it's something I'm really glad that you mentioned. So, out of all the wonderful things that you do, let's see if we can narrow our focus a bit. Could you tell us a bit more about just one of the projects you've worked on that excites you or you'd like to tell us about?

Suzie Imber  9:21  
Yeah, I've got a good one, actually. I have a good example of a really interesting discovery that's led to really interesting places, and it's quite recent in research terms. So to give you a bit of context, the broader subject that I work on is how the Sun interacts with the magnetised planets, so specifically the magnetised terrestrial planets, which in essence means Mercury and the earth, because they have an internal magnetic field. Terrestrial planets means the rocky ones close to the sun. So, I'm interested in Mars and Venus to but mostly mercury in the earth, and while space plasma physics might sound like something that doesn't really affect us in everyday life, it really can do. So the sun is, as I mentioned, has an activity cycle, it's not the same every day and the activity of the sun impacts the Earth. So there are real extreme examples of explosions from the solar surface, called coronal mass ejections. And this is particles and magnetic field explode out of the sun, and they smash into the planets. And really extreme examples of this happen very rarely. So we're talking about the order once a century. So you've probably heard of something called the Carrington Event, which happened in the 1850s. And this was just a huge example of this. And at the time, we weren't that dependent upon technology back in the 1850s. And so it didn't massively impact society. But that kind of event happening today would.. could cause severe damage to power grids, that would be over an extended period of weeks or months, it would damage satellites, satellite instrumentation, we all rely everyday on satellites above our heads... also cause satellites to do orbits due to increased atmospheric drag. So really damaging satellite systems at this point with damaging power grids, communication systems damage as well, damage to human health for anyone who's out as an astronaut. So these events, the problem is they don't happen very often, the smaller events happen more frequently and larger events don't happen very often at all. And so our real challenge is to try to encourage the government to recognise that they still have to fund this work, even though I can't tell them definitely that tomorrow, there's going to be a massive event that will damage society, because I can't tell them that. But they have begun to realise that as we depend so much on technology for our everyday lives, that a big event really would be incredibly damaging. And so they've started to fund more work in this area, which is really great. So in essence, we're sort of space weather forecasters, we're looking at the sun, we're monitoring the sun, we're trying to recognise when there are these eruptions, trying to see where they will go. And if they do come into contact with the earth and the Earth's environment, we're trying to work out what would happen. So forecasting, but also trying to think about how do we design systems that are more resilient to this kind of damage, so in the future, we're less likely to be so impacted by these kinds of events. So that's kind of what I've been doing at the earth over the years. And the earth is lucky in that we have lots of instrumentation, we've got ground based radar systems, we actually build ground based radar systems, at Leicester, we've got these radars that look upwards, we've got satellites that look downwards, we've got loads of spacecraft orbiting at lots of different places. And my research program has brought together all of these things. So using data from lots of different sources, to try to look at the response of the earth to these events. So that's what I've done historically. One of the things that is driven by these kind of events, that's good, probably the only positive, is that we get really bright Aurora. So the Northern Lights, Aurora Borealis and the southern lights are Aurora Australis. And these Aurora get bright, and they move from a circle fairly close to the magnetic poles, they move sort of further towards the equator. And so maybe we see them over Scotland, or maybe we see them over England. And so you can use the Aurora to tell us again about the broader system. So that's kind of the context. Now, stepping back a little bit, I graduated from my PhD and I moved to NASA to be a research scientist. And during my time there, I was looking at the Earth's environment. But during my time there, this spacecraft reached the planet Mercury. And so I got involved in studying Mercury and its environment, again, completely, accidentally, not deliberately, I didn't mean to end up.. I had no goal of working on Mercury. It's one of these things that happens, sometimes, when you're in the right place at the right time. And NASA had built the spacecraft, it got to Mercury, some of my colleagues have been waiting seven years for it to get there, because that's the length of the journey. And I turned up, you know, excited at the right moment to look at that data. So I began to grow an interest in mercury in its environment. Now, I moved back to Leicester some years later. And we were building an instrument that would be on the next mission to Mercury, which, as you mentioned, is called epi Colombo. And it will arrive at Mercury in 2025. So we were designing an instrument to be onboard the spacecraft. And this instrument is X-ray instrument. And it's going to look at X-rays coming off of Mercury's surface. So not in my area of research, specifically, although the spacecraft will be targeting my area of research, but this particular instrument, what happens is the sun gives off X-rays all the timd, and that's proportional to solar activities. So when the sun's really active, it gives off more X-rays. And that's one reason why our spacecraft is going to reach Mercury during solar maximum, because we want loads of X-rays. And those X-rays hit the planetary surface, and they get absorbed by that surface layer of atoms on Mercury's surface. And then those atoms give off an X-ray and turn. And that X-ray the energy, the X ray tells us what that atom was. So we have our X-ray instrument, we look at the surface of Mercury, the surface is lit up by the sun, we collect all the X-rays we see, and we're able to work out the composition of Mercury's surface. And that's the goal of our instrument. When I moved back to Leicester, I was getting involved in this mission more broadly, but it wasn't you know, surface composition isn't really my area of expertise. However, this is a very long story to tell you this part but I had to kind of set the scene.. colleague of mine, we were looking at similar measurements taken from that NASA mission that I worked on, that also had an X-ray instrument on board. And you expect to see the X-rays coming off the side that's lit by the sun, because they're generated by the sun, so the sunlit side gives off these X-rays, we just happen to plots, the X-rays plotted the data on the dark side of the planet. So we would expect to see no data coming off the dark side of the planet, because it's not being hit by X-rays from the sun. And there were X-rays coming off the night side of Mercury. And so we scratched our heads for a long time, we thought carefully about this and have we made a mistake, and had we done something silly. And we convinced ourselves that there were indeed X-rays coming off the right side of Mercury. And some people had kind of proposed this in earlier papers, we began to think, okay, our result is correct.. so what's causing the X-rays. Now, the other thing you should know about Mercury is that it has a magnetic field as I mentioned, but that magnetic field is not centered on the center of the planet, it's offset to the north. This is a strange phenomenon, it's hard for my brain to work out how a magnetic field generated by an internal dynamo, so the rotation of the liquid in a metal section of the core, how that can generate a magnetic field shifted to the north of the planet. The core is not shifted to the north, but the magnetic field is. Okay, let's ignore that mystery for now, because I can't solve that for you. But it is. And so, when we plotted the location of these X-rays, they formed two bands. And those bands were just south of the pole. And this is the North Pole, and just north of the South Pole. Okay, these are now looking a lot like where we expect to see the aurora on the earth, we see it in bands around the North Pole on the South Pole. The thing that really clinched it was that these bands were not equidistant from the planetary equator. They were equidistance north and south from the magnetic equator, which is different from the planetary equator because the dipole's offset to the north. Ah, okay, well hang on, this has to then be ordered by the magnetic fields, something to do with the magnetic field is driving this. Otherwise, why would you have symmetry about the magnetic equator? So gradually, you know the pieces fall into place. This is Aurora. It is Aurora and mercury that has not been seen before, because it's not visible to our eyes, you know, the Aurora at the Earth is caused by particles that travel down magnetic field lines, they hit the Earth's atmosphere and make it glow. But Mercury doesn't have much of an atmosphere so these particles, they don't hit the atmosphere, they hit the surface and make the surface glow and X-rays. And so we realised okay, we've discovered this thing called Mercury's Aurora that we see in X-rays, we can use this Aurora now to tell us all about the broader system, the interaction between the sun and Mercury's magnetic field - we didn't know it existed so we never tried to do that before. And, the implications of this are interesting for my group. Because this happened in about 2015/2016, we had just built an X-ray instruments that was going to be launched to mercury in 2018. So okay, now we just found another source of X-rays we didn't know existed, and we just built an instrument to measure X-rays. So we had to go back and figure out well, our instrument, it was going to look at the day side of mercury, looking for the composition data that we can get from the solar induced X-rays. Now, how can we operate it on the night side of the planet to see these other X-rays? And can we do this routinely? And can we now open up a whole new field of research, using our instrument into auroral physics at Mercury? When we never really intended to study that with our instrument. You know, how do we do that? So that was a bit of a long stories. But hopefully, it kind of gives you an indication of how sometimes things work out for the best, you don't really have a plan, you're just doing a bit of research, and it leads you in a strange direction. And then you end up getting involved in something completely different. That I think, is the essence of why research is exciting.

Zoe Webster  18:42  
That's so fascinating. I can't wait to see what kind of information you can bring back from that mission. That's quite extraordinary. Building these satellites, and doing all of this research, you learn a variety of technical skills. You also apply these technical skills outside of your main line of work. Could you tell us a bit more about that?

Suzie Imber  19:02  
Yeah, that's true. So, starting out as doing big data science, which is what I've been doing over the years, means that you learn things like how to write computer code, how to code on a supercomputer, we happen to have some supercomputers at the university, and takes time to kind of develop these skills. But that's really the only way of analyzing vast swathes of data sometimes that is required. And a really interesting project that I love, which I started, gosh a long time ago now probably in 2016 or 2017, which was that I wanted to try to find all of the mountains in South America. So I've been climbing high altitude climbing for many years at this point. I started out climbing, really, you know, the popular mountains where you can have a guide and there's sort of a route, so Aconcagua in South America, highest mountain in the southern hemisphere, Denali or McKinley and Alaska and then I went off to the Himalayas for a bit and then really found my way back to South America again in the Andes and joined up with a friend who was trying to climb all of the 6000 meter mountains in the Andes. So went on lots of expeditions climbing multiple mountains in one go. And we began to really seriously think about where these 6000 meter mountains were, because we climbed all the ones that were very clearly 6000 meter mountains. And we looked for lists. And there was a list that existed; a Scotsman called John Bigger had made a list of mountains over 6000 meters, using a map and a pencil back in the 80s. And actually, I've been in contact with him, he's a really nice guy, he did a really great job, actually. It's not as easy as it sounds, you don't just find a mountain that's over 6000 meters and sort of tick it off a list, you have to wonder a little bit about the independence of mountains. And what I mean by this is, I have a massive mountain, and on the side of that mountain really high up, there's a huge boulder. At what point is that boulder a separate mountain? And at what point is it just a lump on the side of a bigger mountain, and this is where we start to think about something called the independence of your mountain. You can't count every lamp over 6000 meters that happens to stick up, you have to have some criteria for it being a separate mountain or not. And to sort of paint the broader picture here, this has been done for many, many, many years in the UK, by a number of pioneering climbers and mountaineers, who looked at the drops on either side of a mountain, so they said, okay, if I'm standing on top of a mountain, and I'm going to have to drop down from my summit, in order to go up to another one. If I walk in any direction, well, how far am I going to drop before I start going up again. So this is called a saddle point, you dropped down to a saddle point for you go up to another mountain. So if I only dropped down a meter, before I start going up again to a higher mountain, then my mountain wasn't independent, it was just a boulder. But if I have to drop down 300 meters before I can start going up again, or maybe my mountain actually is a mountain in its own right. And so this is called prominence. And this is done all over the world to define what mountains are, I have a bit of a problem with this definition. And my problem is this, you're picking a number. So in Scotland, you might pick 100 meters, for example, if you go to the Himalayas, and you pick 100 meters, you're going to find there are an awful lot of mountains, because the mountains there are so high, it's really easy to drop 100 meters, and then go back up to a higher mountain. In Scotland, where the mountains are only 1000 meters altitude or just over, it's different. And so we're picking a number, and it's arbitrary. And rather than apply that methodology, there's a really easy fix for this. And the easy fix is that we divide our prominence or drop by the altitude of the mountain we're talking about. So if we think about how that works, what are we doing? Well, we're sort of scaling by height, and it becomes a percentage. So if I say, and this is commonly accepted, 7% dominance; I can apply that 7% number to a mountain in Wales, and that will correspond to a little drop, and I can apply 7% to a mountain in the Himalayas, and that will mean I'll have to have a bigger drop. So I'm still picking a number, but I'm just picking one number, and I can apply that number around every mountain on the earth. To me, that makes a lot more sense. So okay, now I've got a way to mathematically define what a mountain is, gosh, how am I going to do this? Well, I have access to a supercomputer, thankfully. And I have the ability to write code on a supercomputer, and that's handy too. My next door neighbours and partners in crime are the Earth observation science group. And they have a lot of data. So I went to them and chatted with them about the data that we have on the altitude of the Earth. It at the time was pretty poor in terms of free data. But there was this dataset taken by the space shuttle, and it measures the altitude of the Earth's surface. And it's all graded, so it's sort of on a nice grid. And I took that data. Now, in a way, it's good that it wasn't a high resolution data, because already I had a grid that was at 85,000 by 25,000 data points. So we're already talking about billions of data points. And so that's plenty for what I'm trying to do, and requires some processing power. And so I started sort of at night and at weekends and really quietly sort of under the radar writing computer code to automate the search for mountains of South America. And it takes some time to write the code and run the code. And out began popping these mountains. And I had it on display where when it found a new independent mountain, it would pop up and it will show me a map and it will show me where it was, you know, it's hugely exciting, as a mountaineer. So I ran it on mountains over 6000 meters. And then I started thinking, well, actually, I can do this on mountains over 5000 meters. So I run the code on shorter mountains, 5000 meters or above in South America and discovered a lot of mountains. There are 1142 mountains at 7% dominance above 5000 meters in the Andes. And the previous lists really were absolutely incomplete because it's impossible to do this job with a pencil and a map, especially when you start thinking about the fact that it's not just picking the peaks, it's finding out whether they're independent, it's really, really hard to do. And so I ran this computer code, found all these mountains, made the first ever list of mountains complete list of mountains in the Andes and then realised that some of these had no names, some of them had never been climbed before, had to confess to the university that I had been using the supercomputer to find new mountains. And actually, they were very lovely about it. And they were very supportive and set off to these unnamed unclimbed mountains to go and climb them.

Zoe Webster  25:17  
That's amazing. It sounds extraordinary. So your experience as a mountaineer, which you've just talked about came in handy when you took part in the series that I mentioned before, BBC2's "Astronauts: Do You Have What It Takes?". It is still available on Foxtel, I think in Australia, if anyone has Foxtel and hasn't seen it, I really encourage you to give it a look. Could you give us an overview of the series and what the training experience was like for you?

Suzie Imber  25:45  
Yeah, I certainly can. I guess I'll start with sort of how I ended up being involved with it. Because at that point, I was doing a lot of mountain climbing, I was doing research, really, and teaching, and was very happy with that world, as it stood. I never watch reality television, and I had no desire to appear on television ever in my life. And so I just want to kind of give an intro to how I ended up being on a reality television series, because I'm the most unlikely person you can imagine to end up in that position. So really, I found out about it when I was in South America, I'd been climbing for a month or two, I guess. And it came down to a small village in Argentina, which has free public WiFi, which is amazing in its own right. So I opened up my laptop and all these emails poured into my laptop from being away for months. And one of them was from the BBC saying, do you want to be an astronaut, and they'd come up with this concept of putting a number of people through astronaut selection, then this follows a very successful mission by Tim Peake, Britain's latest astronaut, European Space Agency astronaut, that had been to space a few years earlier, and really inspired the entire population to think about space and astronauts. So on the back of that the BBC decided that they wanted to commission a sort of educational, inspirational type series around astronaut selection. And they'd emailed a lot of places where you might find people, astronaut candidates, so people working in science, doctors are great, engineers, pilots, but they's also just put up general adverts to anyone, if you want to apply for our BBC television series, you know, send them an application. So they got a lot of applications suffice to say they have 1000s of applications for this show. And I happened to see their email. And I didn't actually reply to it immediately, but then there was a reminder email and I thought, well, I didn't come down for a single day to get food and fuel one night and a warm bed before heading back up to the mountains again. And I thought, well, I'm just gonna send a quick message. So I filled in a little form, describing a few bits and bobs about what I was up to, sent it off, didn't think much more of it. And they tried to get back in touch with me, but I was up a mountain. So, it took a while before we were able to get into communication properly. And I'd explained oh, I'm really sorry, I was climbing a mountain, I think that kind of piqued their interest a bit more. And so I started getting involved in this sort of, without really thinking about the consequences too carefully, because I figured I wasn't going to get picked anyway, so it wasn't a big deal. And when I got back from the mountains, I started going to the selection rounds and really began thinking about, gosh, what am I actually doing? Am I really applying to be on a reality television series on the BBC, you know, the only thing I'd ever watched before was the Bake Off. And if you have the Bake Off, I love baking. And that's great. But I'd heard of other things like Big Brother and those sorts of shows. And I certainly had no intention of going on something like that. So it was quite interesting. I had lots of conversations with the BBC around kind of how it would work. I remember talking to mum and dad about this, because they're great people to ask your mom or dad, what do you think about this, you're never too old to ask mum and dad what they think about what you're about to do. And they had their reservations too around the concept of me going on reality television; I'll be linked to my institution, my university, I'm a scientist, they'll set me up with some challenge that I can't do, which is really easy but for some reason I mess it up, I'll get kicked out, I'll go back to my university, they'll disown me because I'm a disgrace. And so all of these sort of ways of things go wrong with playing out in my mind. And I also had, in my mind, the idea of social media, and how damaging social media can be and how quickly you can be judged on social media for how your actions are perceived. And I say perceived because in essence, whoever is making that series can portray you in whatever light they choose to. But I trusted the BBC, I really trusted the BBC and what they were doing, and I believe in the shows that they do particularly of an educational nature. And so we talked a lot about it, they persuaded me it wasn't going to be Big Brother. And I got through the rounds and decided to be part of it. And so there were 12 of us that were selected to be part of the series. And we got very little notice, actually, so I was teaching at the time; so I had to sort of give lots of lectures to my students in a single week, which they didn't appreciate. I couldn't tell anyone where I was going. So I had to tell my students I was doing something really exciting that I couldn't tell them about and they know me quite well so they just sort of raised an eyebrow and assumed they would find out eventually and everyone thought I was just climbing mountains. So all my mountaineering friends thought that I got on a work visit and all of my work colleagues assumed I was off climbing mountains. And so I was able to be away from work without too many questions being asked at that point. I did have to tell of course, my boss and the head of the College of Science and Engineering that I was going and actually in a way it showed great confidence from them in me to encourage me or to allow me to go and do this on behalf of the university. I mean, it wasn't officially on behalf of the university, but obviously, I work at the University and what I do reflects on them. And so the show begins, you know, they literally sent me a train ticket reference number, so I didn't know where I was going, pack your bags, go down to the train station, pick up your train ticket at this time, and get on that train. So off I went. And of course, on day one, they took away our mobile phones or wallet, laptop, any access to the outside world was removed from us. And there's lots of reasons for that. One reason is that, that it won't be tweeting out here I am on astronauts during this test, because that's gonna ruin the whole show. But partly also because the social isolation is exactly what you need to test for astronauts going into space, you need to test whether people are able to work independently without the network of people we rely on day to day, you know, when you have a bad day, and you go and phone your friend, have a chat about it. You can't do that if things go wrong, face in the same way. So can you be an independent person who's able to cope with that social isolation. So okay, the whole thing begins, there are 12 of us, 12 strangers, and it is like the Bake Off in the fact that as people go through, the challenges get harder and harder. So more and more exciting, but also increasing in difficulty. And it's not like the Bake Off in the sense that you do three challenges, you know, what kind of thing they're going to be. And then if you're the worst you leave, it wasn't like that at all. It was challenges that came upon us could be one challenge a day could be travel day could be three challenges in a day, you never know what's coming, you don't know what the challenge is, you walk into a room, and there's your challenge in front of you alone; so less group work, particularly early on. And the idea is that as the challenges progress, people will start to struggle, and at the point at which you can no longer keep jumping over those hurdles that are put in front of you is your time to leave. So sometimes one person leaves sometimes two people leave sometimes no one leaves. So there's a lot of uncertainty as part of the process. You don't know what's coming, you don't know how many people are leaving, you don't know anything. At the point at which you leave, okay, you pick up your stuff, and you're back to your normal life again. And you don't know how long you're away for either. So I'd said to the university, I don't know how long I'll be away for probably be kicked out first. So I'm guessing I'll be back in like a week or two. Okay fine they say, off you go. And so, yeah, that was the premise of the process. Now, I should say here at this point that it sounds a bit farcical. But actually, it was really serious. The judge, the main judge was Commander Chris Hadfield, he's been to space three times as a Canadian astronaut, he's involved in astronaut selection. And so he was the person who was setting the challenges, but also analyzing the candidates alongside Dr. Iya Whiteley who's a clinical psychologist, and Dr. Kevin Fong, who's a extreme environment medic. They're sort of a panel of three judges judging everybody as we went through. And I think the you know, the challenges were wide ranging, and a lot of them were in the early part, were associated with ascertaining people's fears and phobias, and the extent to which they could overcome them. So for an example, being put in a very small space; we had these sort of tiny pods that we got into, which are probably about a meter radius, I guess, in a sphere, you have to get into this pod, you've taken your boots off, you've unlaced your boots, because that's what you're asked to do. Who knows what's about to happen, you know, you're just asked to take your boots off in the laces out, get into this pod, they put the lid on, they post some instructions, through the little breathing hole. Okay, read the instructions. Hi, Susie, your task is to lace your boots and put them on your feet, tie them up and stand up after 20 minutes. Your time starts when the lights go out. Okay? Then it goes dark. Alright, so I have no means of knowing the time. I've got my laces in one hand and my boots in the other hand, and I really wish I'd thought more carefully about how many eyes there are when you're lifting up your boots, but I didn't count that. So how am I going to count time while doing this task in the dark. And so each person came up with a different strategy for how to do it. So that was looking at not just can you multitask, figure out a way to do this really quickly. I can't count to 20 minutes, I'm going to have to break it down. How will I do it? I'm going to count to five minutes four times. That was my plan. Okay, well, how will I know when I've got to five minutes, which chunk of five minutes I'm on? I'm going to move my hair band. What do I have? I just have a band in my hair. Okay, first five minutes it's in my hair, second five minutes on my left wrist, third five minutes I'm going to put on my right wrist, final five minutes back in my hair again. Okay, great. So you know, I've got a plan, lace the beats up, off we go. Everyone came up with a different plan. This is around, not just multitasking but also claustrophobia. You're in a small space. Some people really struggled with that you have a heart rate monitor on, you've got a GoPro camera looking at you. So, how are people coping? We did things like taking our own blood. So learning how to take blood and then suddenly being told, okay, actually, your task is to take your own blood from out of your own arm, the idea of taking it from a dummy, which is what we'd been practicing, that's one thing, I can manage that. I'm quite squeamish as an individual. So, can I now take the blood out of my own arm? You know, it turns out when you've got a needle in your hand and you're trying to stab yourself, it's harder than it sounds. So we're talking about now are you afraid of needles.. we did things where we were put in a situation where people might be afraid of heights. So just going through things one by one, and also dealing with situations that are new and unexpected; for an average human being, you'd be fearful of. So for example, being strapped into a capsule, which is called the Dunker, that then gets submersed under the water and starts sort of flipping over and over and over. So you're strapped in, you're upside down, you're holding your breath, there's bubbles everywhere. You're strapped into this capsule, the exits are blocked. And you are given an instruction, your instruction is to sit still; take a deep breath before it goes under, sit still wait, just wait for the bubbles to clear, wait until this thing stops moving, count to five, slowly, find an exit, release your harness, and swim to the surface. Now, astronauts are not superhuman, you put anyone in that environment where you're strapped into a capsule on the water is rising, and you're going to be nervous about it. Because it's human nature. It's not about not being nervous, it's about whether you can deal with the nerves and carry out your instructions as they've been given to you. So it's about dealing with pressurised situations in an appropriate manner. And so you can see that's just sort of a taste of some of the earlier challenges, and they got harder and more exciting as we went through.

Zoe Webster  36:08  
Interesting that you bring up those ones cause I myself was terrified of the claustrophobia type ones, they looked very challenging to me.

Suzie Imber  36:18  
Yeah, and you know, each person is going to find different aspects difficult. Yeah. So having said that, it's terrifying - again, it's not about whether you're terrified, it's about how you deal with it. So you actually could have done fine as long as you're able to control your fear.

Zoe Webster  36:31  
Yeah, so good. I've mentioned what I find the most challenging, but I'm really interested to ask you, which tasks that you had the most fun with, and maybe one that you found a bit more challenging or difficult to approach?

Suzie Imber  36:45  
Sure. So kind of moving through the process towards the end towards the more exciting ones, you know, there's a few to highlight there. In terms of kind of technical difficulty, I had never learned to scuba dive. It's just not something that I had considered spending time doing. There's a lot of things that I spend time doing and that wasn't one of them. I don't live near the coast and don't know about scuba diving off the coast of the UK. It's possible. But you know, it's not such part of our national identity being in the water, as I'm sure it is for you. And so I'd never learned how to do it. And so we had to learn to scuba dive.. suddenly, halfway through the process, those of us that didn't know how to scuba dive were put on a crash course, it was in a quarry just outside of London, in the winter, in a dry suit. So I'm sure many of your listeners will have learned to scuba dive and pretty sure they didn't learn to scuba dive their first time in a dry suit. It's really hard. And I spent most of my time freezing cold sort of vaguely upside down in this quarry in the silt, really not enjoying the experience of scuba diving. And my next experience of scuba diving is on national television. And so in terms of sort of operational issues, I did manage to cope with the scuba diving, but it was something that made me anxious because I knew that I hadn't mastered the skill. And some of the other people that I was with at the time, have dived 50 times on all continents, you know, were really highly experienced, and I wasn't in that position. And so I felt nervous on that front. The thing that if you watch the show, the thing that they really picked me up on most of all, is leadership. And that's something that.. they made us do a challenge. And some members of the group knowing it was a leadership challenge, we're fairly vocal about how to complete the challenge. It was a challenge in one part of it was in an area of my own expertise, which is abseiling. Of course, I'm a climber, I can abseil, I've abseiled a million times, but somebody else I allowed someone else to dominate the conversation and to take over that conversation because they were extremely insistent, they were very loud, they weren't good at listening. And I wasn't forceful enough to say actually, you're a novice at this. I've done this a lot, so let me control the situation, I wasn't confident enough to make that statement. And so then I was picked up on on my leadership style. And I have a couple of kind of comments on that, I guess. The first comment is that I didn't have enough confidence, and that's something I've always sort of found that I feel easily intimidated in certain circumstances, particularly if I'm not feeling particularly comfortable. In this case, there's a strange upsell device I've never seen before. And I'm being asked to do things in a way that I'm not used to. And that sort of threw me a little bit, but also I genuinely wasn't confident enough to make my voice heard in that time. But another aspect to it.. Actually, I made a statement that I that I stand by, and I'm quite pleased they aired it on the show, because I think is important, which is that I work in academia, my background is academia. And Zoe if you and I disagree on something, then we'll probably sit down with tea and cake, we'll have a chat about it, and we'll figure out. I'll give my argument and you'll tell me your scientific argument. And we'll work through the pros and cons, and we may come to a consensus. And that's the way we work, that's the world in which I live. Some of the people that were on the show with me had been in the military for many years, and so their solid leadership is very different to mine. Actually, I believe that there is a time and a place for both of those. And I literally said on the show, I said, if you are looking for the kind of leader that's going to shout at other people and force people to do their will, that's not me, I'm never going to be that person, because that's not what I do. I'd rather lead by example, I'd rather speak when I'm required to speak and allow others to complete challenges that they're perfectly capable of completing without my intervention, if I'm not needed, so a much quieter way of being a leader. That was interesting in the sense that eventually on the show, they made that statement too and they said, okay, well Suzie's style is different, but she's still able to lead. So the leadership was a big deal. Things I enjoyed, flying in a centrifuge. You know, going to Sweden going in their centrifuge flying around with 5G. The night before Chris had given us the Russian alphabet, like the characters and the pronunciation of those characters in Cyrillic, and as we flew around words were appearing in Cyrillic, and we had to read out those words. So multitasking, I'm now flying around and trying to read words in Cyrillic, you know, there's lots of things going on. But what an interesting experience to have. And actually, this is what tempted me onto the show was the possibility that I could do that; you don't get to do that as a normal person in everyday life. So the opportunities that it provided.. you know, even the scuba dive, we dived down to the bottom of the ocean in Florida to an underwater training facility called Nemo, where they do lots of different types of training. But certainly astronaut training, astronauts stay there for weeks at a time at the bottom of the ocean. I never imagined that I would do that! Floating in microgravity in a plane where we did 15 parabolas. It's just normal plane, but they've taken the seats out. And as the plane sort of goes over the top of its loop and starts plummeting towards the earth, everything inside the plane floats, and you feel like you're floating in space for about sort of 30 seconds at a time, literally doing cartwheels, backflips, bouncing off the walls and the ceilings trying to do a manual dexterity challenge. So the opportunities were enormous, and the challenges were interesting, and the things that I struggled with really were certainly confidence. I guess, also, the fact that you get quite worn down by it, because you're doing this day in day out, more challenges coming your way. All the challenges we did didn't appear on the show, in the end, we did 44 challenges over about six weeks. You never know if you're going to get kicked out. You never know what's happening. You never get feedback. And that's true of astronaut selection more broadly too. No one Pat's, you on the head and says, well done Suzie. It's just all about sort of, you know, if you don't get kicked out, okay, must have done okay. And after the end of every challenge, there was a camera in our faces, and someone saying, so how did you think you did? Well, you know, I'm not sure we I wasn't great. I was kind of okay. And they're like, well, you're going home? Well, I'm not sure.. Do you think you actually deserve to be here? Oh, well, you know, there's lots of sort of self doubts and begins to creep in. And actually, what's fascinating was watching the show aired on television, because watching other people's answers to those questions versus my responses to the question, again, kind of highlighted our different take on things because some of them will say, yeah, I think I did pretty well, actually. Yep, I think I nailed that one. And sometimes I'd done better than that person in the challenge. And I'd be standing there saying, oh, you know, I didn't quite get that right. So that was quite a lesson for me as well, just watching it back to sort of see how other people responded and to really recognize that I wasn't gauging my own performance in a very positive light.

Webster  0:14  
Yeah, that kind of touches on what you said earlier about perfectionism when you're constantly going, maybe? I don't know. It sounds like an amazing experience. And I'm so glad we got to watch it here in Australia, because I absolutely loved it. In it, you were able to demonstrate so many of the skills that you've acquired in your various endeavours? What's next for you?

Suzie Imber  0:40  
Oh, good question. So, after the astronaut series ended, I decided that I wanted to take this amazing footage that I had from the television series and talk to kids more about the work that I do - kind of used this experience, which the images are pretty captivating so I felt fairly sure that I could weave it into a story that would be interesting to people of all ages - and use that to also illustrate the work that I do as a scientist, because at the end of the day, it was an amazing experience, but it was a television series, and I'm still a scientist at the end of the day. And so what I wanted to do was sort of use that to support young people thinking about a career in science, or to encourage people to think about a career in science, to try and break some of the stereotypes that we have when people think about scientists. And so I launched a huge outreach program, I spoke to 10s of 1000s of children in their classrooms, doing my normal day job at five o'clock in the morning at 10 o'clock at night, at weekends, and during the day I was heading off across the country to talk to kids from Cornwall to Scotland, it was insane. And looking back on it, it was such an insane time. And I was excited, and I was enthused, and I was full of energy for it. I did it for a couple of years. And then I just sort of thought, oh my goodness, I'm exhausted, you know, my car is breaking down. I need to think and be more strategic about this. Because while I love talking to 30 kids in the classroom, actually, these demands keep coming, you know, I thought the enthusiasm from the public would die off pretty quickly, so I'd start with lots of requests and with time, they drop off fairly fast. But what I found was that they didn't. And so on reflection, you know, okay, I've got to deal with this somehow, I can't spend the rest of my life doing this. And I literally could spend the rest of my life doing this, you know, there were enough people and enough demand. So what am I going to do? So decided to be more strategic, to do larger events to involve my students at the University, which is great for them, because it means that they gain that rich experience alongside me and I can teach them and they can bring their own ideas, to partner with organisations that maybe have a broader reach as well. So the Ogden trust is a organisation in the UK, a charity, that focus on physics education, so I contributed to a lot of their resources and worked with them. And so of course, then everything I do gets amplified because they can send it out to all of their schools, for example, as a resource. Started doing big fairs, so festivals, you know, music festivals, gosh, I've never been to music festival in my life. And

now I'm on stage at latitudes, the real world and it was exciting. It was interesting. I went on stage at the Royal Albert Hall, which is a massive venue, 1000s of people in London, answering questions on the topic of space, which is a massive topic, with Chris Hadfield actually, strangely. So lots of kind of different things came from it that I never could have forecast. So nowadays, I'm trying to focus on it, especially with COVID, with we're getting a broader reach. So I did an event last week, called Stem Fest, and I hosted a day alongside a colleague, and we had 45,000 kids sign up from around the world. So in one day's worth of time, plus all the organisation you know, now the reach is massive. And with our amazing guests who came on to speak to us, including Chris Hadfield, we're able to get a much broader reach. So I'm still doing a lot of outreach, but I'm trying to be more targeted. At work, yeah, well, our mission is heading for Mercury now. It just did a flyby of Mercury, in the beginning of October. Its next flyby of mercury will be in June, and it will arrive at Mercury after six flybys of Mercury will arrive at Mercury in December 2025. So a lot of work to be done in preparation for arrival of our instruments at Mercury, a large laboratory program to be run and lots of theoretical work that needs to be done; so that's going to keep me busy. Teaching - I still teach my undergraduates from first year to fourth year to PhD students. And then also I joined mountain rescue in Derbyshire, where I live in the Peak District, a few months ago. It's something I've been toying with for a really long time, because in the UK, and I don't know how it works in Australia or elsewhere in the world, but we have this volunteer Mountain Rescue Service. And it's groups of people who live or work in these regions of the UK where lots of people do mountaineering, climbing, etc., who are called out to rescue people who are in difficulty. And so for us, they get called out about 170 times a year, which is a lot. Again, entirely volunteers who go out and deal with all sorts of accidents and emergencies, whether it's a rock climber that's fallen and broken both legs or somebody who's had a terrible mountain biking accident.. could even be a car crash where the cars have rolled a long way from the road and someone needs to go and recover their casualties and look after them.. could be a light aircraft crash could be missing people, you know, the reach is broad. And having lived and enjoyed these mountainous regions in the UK for so many years, knowing that mountain rescue can be called upon if anything ever went wrong, I think that I really realised that now is the time, now I live in the Peak District, to sort of give back to that community. It's a massive training program, it's 18 months long training every Tuesday and every other weekend, there's a lot of skills to learn. And having spent a large part of my life in the mountains, you might think I already know those skills, but there are an awful lot that I don't know that I need to learn. So it's a huge program, huge amount of dedication to do this. And then you get added to the call out list and you can be summoned to a rescue at any time. So, that's the thing that I'm focusing on sort of outside of work at the moment is trying to get through this training program, so that I can qualify to be a part of mountain rescue. And then, you know, start being that person that turns up on the worst day of someone's life when something terrible has happened. To be the person that's able to go and try and make a difference to make it better is a really meaningful thing to do, and it means a lot to me.

Zoe Webster  6:00  
100%, so much work, as you say, so much involved in it, but such a reward at the end. That's amazing. I have one final question for you. So our broad audience here at WIT is young people studying technology, a lot of young women in various STEM degrees; and I wanted to ask you, if you had one piece of advice to give young people, particularly women, studying a degree in science or in STEM.

Suzie Imber  6:26  
Ooh, it's tricky. You know, I'm not one for giving advice, so it's tough. I would say that some of the most exciting things that I've done over the years have been unplanned and as a result of taking opportunities, sometimes it takes a lot of courage to take an opportunity that comes your way because you might be filled with self doubt, or uncertainty, or you don't know what the outcome will be. And I think for a lot of us, and a lot of young women going into science, we feel that sometimes it holds us back this recognition that what we like is to go into something where we think we can do well, and we feel confident that we can do well and we'll give our best and it will be nice. And sometimes in life things don't work out that way. So I would say that sometimes you have to be brave and be bold and be courageous and try things and try new things. And recognise that it might not work, you know, it might be a disaster, and that's okay. You know, I've taken up ballroom dancing, I took up the orchestral pedal harp, I've taken up woodworking, I've taken up languages, I've taken up a world of things. Wushu kung fu I did for years, you know, capoeira, I'm terrible at 99% of these things I'm an absolute disaster. And actually, that's important. And so I would say taking up and trying things that are outside your comfort zone is really important. So when that big opportunity comes your way, when the BBC ring you up and say, do you want to be an astronaut and be on our television series, you have the courage to say actually, I want to take this opportunity. I might fail on national television in front of everyone I've ever known, and probably everyone I ever will know, and I might embarrass myself terribly. But, I'm prepared to give it a go. And so that requires some courage and some experience. So I guess that's my advice.

Zoe Webster  8:03  
Absolutely. That's something I think we should all take on board for sure. Suzie, it's been an absolute pleasure to have you on our podcast. I so appreciate you taking the time away from your busy life to call all the way from the other side of the world. It's amazing that we could do this. So thank you very much.

Suzie Imber  8:21  
You're most welcome. And thank you for inviting me

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
